2  --  JWT and cookies  (how the server remembers you after login)

1)  The problem  --  HTTP has no memory

HTTP (HyperText Transfer Protocol) is STATELESS. Each request is handled on its own. The server does not remember the previous request. So after a user finishes login, the very next request looks like a stranger's request to the server. We need something the browser can attach to EVERY request that proves "I already logged in as this user".

2)  Two ways to remember  --  session vs stateless token

There are two common approaches:

  (a)  SERVER-SIDE SESSION.
        On login the server generates a random string (the session id), stores  { session_id -> user_id, expiry }  in its own DB or memory, and sends the session id to the browser. On every next request the browser sends the id back; the server looks it up.

  (b)  STATELESS TOKEN (JWT).
        On login the server builds a small signed piece of JSON that already contains  { user_id, expiry } , and sends it to the browser. On every next request the browser sends the token back; the server just VERIFIES the signature. No lookup table on the server side.

Trade-offs:

  -  Server-side session: easy to revoke a single session (just delete the row); but every request costs a DB lookup, and scaling across many servers needs shared session storage.
  -  Stateless JWT: no lookup on each request (fast, scales easily); but you cannot instantly invalidate a leaked token  --  it stays valid until its expiry, unless you add extra machinery.

This project uses JWT.

3)  Cookie  --  a closer look

The cookie idea was introduced in the HTTP notes (topic 3, part 1). Here we look at exactly how it wires.

The server sets a cookie by adding a  Set-Cookie  header in its response:

     Set-Cookie: token=abc123; Path=/; HttpOnly

The browser stores this. On every next request to the same site the browser adds:

     Cookie: token=abc123

... automatically, without JavaScript doing anything. That is why a cookie is the natural place to keep an authentication marker.

A response can set several cookies (one  Set-Cookie  header per cookie). A request bundles them all into a single  Cookie  header, separated by  ;  .

4)  Cookie flags  --  what each flag protects against

Every  Set-Cookie  header can carry flags after the  name=value  pair. Each flag closes one attack door.

  -  HttpOnly
        The browser will not expose this cookie to JavaScript ( document.cookie  hides it). Protects against XSS (Cross-Site Scripting): even if an attacker injects a script into your page, the script cannot read the cookie.

  -  Secure
        The browser sends this cookie only over HTTPS, never plain HTTP. Protects against a network attacker on the same wifi from sniffing the cookie in transit.

  -  SameSite=Strict  /  SameSite=Lax  /  SameSite=None
        Controls whether the browser sends this cookie on requests that come from OTHER sites.

        -  Strict: cookie is sent only when the request originates from the same site. Safest for auth cookies, but breaks flows where the user clicks a link from an email to a logged-in page.
        -  Lax: cookie is sent on same-site requests and on top-level GET navigations from other sites. Sensible default.
        -  None: cookie is sent on ALL cross-site requests. Requires the  Secure  flag. Use only when the API is on a different origin than the frontend.

        SameSite is the main defense against CSRF (Cross-Site Request Forgery), the attack where a malicious site tricks your logged-in browser into sending a hostile request to your bank.

  -  Path=/some/prefix
        Cookie is sent only for URLs whose path starts with this prefix. Usually  Path=/ .

  -  Domain=example.com
        Cookie is sent to the given domain and its subdomains. If you leave it out, the cookie is bound to the exact host that set it.

  -  Max-Age=SECONDS   or   Expires=DATE
        How long the browser keeps the cookie. Without either flag the cookie is a SESSION cookie  --  gone when the browser closes.  Max-Age  is a number of seconds and is the modern choice;  Expires  is a fixed date. If both are present,  Max-Age  wins.

Sensible defaults for an auth cookie:   HttpOnly; Secure; SameSite=Lax; Path=/; Max-Age=3600 .

5)  JWT  --  what a JSON Web Token looks like

A JWT (JSON Web Token) is a string with three parts joined by dots:

     HEADER . PAYLOAD . SIGNATURE

Each part is a piece of data encoded in BASE64URL (a URL-safe variation of base64). A real token looks like this (line-wrapped here for the page; in a real header it is one line):

     eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6IkpXVCJ9
     .eyJzdWIiOiI0MiIsImV4cCI6MTcwMDAwMzYwMH0
     .7bJmxK7tX_9K0JqYb4dQm6ROf9lZP0LI2vT5Xl8lJIQ

Decode the HEADER (first part) from base64url:

     {"alg":"HS256","typ":"JWT"}

Decode the PAYLOAD (second part) from base64url:

     {"sub":"42","exp":1700003600}

The SIGNATURE is raw bytes, not JSON.

Anyone with the token can decode the header and payload  --  there is no secret in the decoding step, it is just base64. Do NOT put secrets in the payload.

6)  Header  --  which algorithm signed this

The header is a tiny JSON object with two standard fields:

  -  alg   --  the signing algorithm (e.g.  HS256 ,  RS256 ).
  -  typ   --  almost always  "JWT" .

7)  Payload  --  the claims

The payload holds CLAIMS: individual facts about the token and the user. Standard claim names are reserved:

  -  sub   (subject)     --  who this token is about, usually the user id.
  -  iat   (issued at)   --  unix timestamp when the token was created.
  -  exp   (expiry)      --  unix timestamp after which the token is no longer valid.
  -  iss   (issuer)      --  who created the token (your app's identifier).
  -  aud   (audience)    --  who this token is intended for.

You can also add custom claims (e.g.  "role": "admin" ). Keep the payload SMALL  --  the whole token travels on every request.

Anyone who reads the token can read the claims. Never put a password, a secret, or private data in the payload.

8)  Signature  --  signed, not encrypted

The server takes  base64url(header) + "." + base64url(payload) , then computes:

     signature = HMAC_SHA256( that string, SECRET_KEY )

... and appends the base64url of the signature. This is the HS256 algorithm.

The important distinction:

  -  SIGNED means: anyone can read the payload, but nobody can CHANGE it without knowing the secret. Change a single character in the payload and the signature will not match anymore  --  verification fails.
  -  ENCRYPTED means: nobody can read the payload without the secret. JWT does NOT do this by default. If you need it, a separate spec called JWE (JSON Web Encryption) exists. Rare in web-app auth.

An alternative algorithm  RS256  uses a KEYPAIR: the server signs with a private key; anyone can verify with the public key. Useful when many services need to verify tokens issued by one central auth service. For a single-service app,  HS256  with one secret is enough.

9)  Secret key  --  how to hold it

The secret used for HS256 must be:

  -  LONG and RANDOM. At least 32 bytes of random data.
  -  KEPT OUT of source code and out of the git repo.
  -  Read from an environment variable at startup (e.g.  os.environ["JWT_SECRET"] ).
  -  Different in development and production.

If the secret leaks, anyone can mint valid tokens for any user. Rotate it (change to a new one) immediately; all existing tokens become invalid.

10)  Expiry and refresh tokens

The  exp  claim is what stops a stolen token from being valid forever. Common values are 15 minutes to a few hours for the main token.

Short expiries hurt user experience (the user gets logged out often). The common fix is TWO tokens:

  -  ACCESS TOKEN. Short-lived (say 15 minutes). Sent on every API request.
  -  REFRESH TOKEN. Long-lived (say 7 days). Used only against one route  /refresh  that hands out a new access token.

For this project a single token with a longer  exp  (say 1 hour or 1 day) is enough. Refresh tokens are a later upgrade.

11)  Where to store the token on the browser

Three common places:

  (a)  localStorage
        Plain JavaScript can read it  --  so any XSS attack instantly steals the token. AVOID for auth.

  (b)  Memory (a plain JS variable)
        Safer than localStorage, but the user is logged out on every page refresh. Painful UX.

  (c)  HttpOnly cookie
        JavaScript cannot read it. Browser sends it automatically on every request. Best default. This is what we use.

Bringing it together: put the JWT INSIDE an  HttpOnly; Secure; SameSite=Lax  cookie. XSS cannot read the token; CSRF is handled by  SameSite=Lax ; the browser handles attaching it to every request.

12)  Full flow  --  login and the requests that follow

     1. Client   --  POST /signup   with email + password.
        Server hashes the password (Part 1), stores the user row.

     2. Client   --  POST /login    with email + password.
        Server verifies the bcrypt hash.
        Server builds a payload:   {"sub": user_id, "exp": now + 3600}
        Server signs it  ->  JWT string.
        Server responds with:
             Set-Cookie: token=<jwt>; HttpOnly; Secure;
                         SameSite=Lax; Path=/; Max-Age=3600

     3. Client   --  GET /me    (or any protected route).
        Browser automatically adds:
             Cookie: token=<jwt>
        Server reads the cookie, calls  jwt.decode  with the secret.
        If the signature is valid and  exp  is in the future  ->  extract  sub   ->  load that user.
        If not  ->  return 401 Unauthorized.

     4. Client   --  POST /logout .
        Server responds with:
             Set-Cookie: token=; Max-Age=0
        which tells the browser to delete the cookie.

The actual FastAPI routes for this are in Part 3.

13)  PyJWT  --  the Python library

PyJWT is the standard Python library for encoding and decoding JWTs.

Install (inside your venv):

     pip install pyjwt

Encode (create a token):

Code:

     import jwt
     import time

     SECRET = "change-me-in-prod"

     payload = {
         "sub": "42",
         "iat": int(time.time()),
         "exp": int(time.time()) + 3600,
     }

     token = jwt.encode(
         payload,
         SECRET,
         algorithm="HS256",
     )
     print(token)

Output (example, truncated):

     eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6IkpXVCJ9.eyJzdWIi...

Decode (verify and read a token):

Code:

     import jwt

     SECRET = "change-me-in-prod"

     try:
         data = jwt.decode(
             token,
             SECRET,
             algorithms=["HS256"],
         )
         print(data)
     except jwt.ExpiredSignatureError:
         print("token expired")
     except jwt.InvalidTokenError:
         print("token invalid")

Output on success:

     {'sub': '42', 'iat': 1700000000, 'exp': 1700003600}

Notes:

  -  algorithm=  (singular) when encoding;   algorithms=  (list) when decoding. Always pass the list explicitly  --  see gotcha (b) below.
  -  jwt.decode  automatically checks  exp  and raises  ExpiredSignatureError  when the token is past its expiry.
  -  ExpiredSignatureError  is a subclass of  InvalidTokenError , so a single  except jwt.InvalidTokenError  catches both.

14)  Common errors

  (a)   Trusting the payload without verifying

        If you just base64-decode the payload and use it, an attacker can send any values they like. ALWAYS call  jwt.decode  with the secret  --  that is what verifies the signature.

  (b)   Forgetting  algorithms=  on decode

        Older PyJWT versions defaulted to any algorithm the token itself claimed. Attackers could send a token with  {"alg": "none"}  and skip the signature check. Modern PyJWT refuses this, but always pass  algorithms=["HS256"]  explicitly.

  (c)   Secret written in the code or committed to git

        Never write the JWT secret as a string literal in a  .py  file that ends up in git. Read it from an environment variable.

  (d)   No  exp  in the payload

        A token without  exp  is valid forever. If it leaks once, it is game over. Always include  exp .

  (e)   Cookie without  Secure  in production

        Without  Secure  the browser will send the cookie over plain HTTP. On real deployments always set  Secure .

  (f)   SameSite=None  without  Secure

        Browsers reject this combination. If you truly need cross-site cookies, both flags are required.

  (g)   Clock skew

        exp  is a unix timestamp compared against the server's clock. If your server clock drifts by minutes, valid tokens can look expired (or vice versa). Keep servers time-synced (NTP  --  Network Time Protocol).

  (h)   Sensitive data in the payload

        The payload is READABLE by anyone who has the token. Never put a password, an API key, or private user data. Only stable identifiers (user id, role).

In section 3 we wire this up in FastAPI  --  a real  /login  route that signs the token and sets the cookie, and a small dependency that reads and verifies the cookie on every protected route.
