18  --  Virtual environment  (what and why, create, activate, deactivate)

1)  What a virtual environment is

A VIRTUAL ENVIRONMENT (or "venv") is an isolated Python setup for ONE project. It gives that project its own copy of Python tools and its own place to install packages  --  separate from the system Python and from other projects.

Inside a venv you can:

  -  install packages without touching the system Python.
  -  pin a package to a specific version for this project without affecting others.
  -  delete the whole thing at any time without harming your system.


2)  Why you need one

Two big reasons:

  (a) DIFFERENT PROJECTS NEED DIFFERENT VERSIONS. Project A may need  requests 2.28  , Project B may need  requests 2.32 . If you install globally, one project breaks the other.

  (b) THE SYSTEM Python is often managed by the operating system itself. Installing packages globally can corrupt the system or require  sudo . A venv avoids both.

Rule of thumb: every Python project gets its own virtual environment.


3)  Creating a venv

Command:

     python3 -m venv <folder-name>

Convention: name the folder  .venv  (with a leading dot). Some people use  venv  without the dot. Both work; pick one and stick with it.

     python3 -m venv .venv


What does  -m  mean?

-m  is a FLAG for the  python3  command. It means "run the following MODULE as a script". Python finds a module by that name (from the standard library or from your installed packages) and runs its built-in entry point.

Two ways to run Python code:

     python3 script.py
        Run a Python FILE by its path.

     python3 -m <module>
        Run an installed MODULE by its
        name. Python locates it on the
        module search path (see  sys.path
        in section 14) and runs it.

So  python3 -m venv .venv  means:

     "Hey Python, find the module named
      venv  (it ships with the standard
      library) and run it, passing the
      argument  .venv ."

The  venv  module then does the actual work of creating the virtual environment in a folder called  .venv .

Other common examples of  -m :

     python3 -m pip install requests
        Run the  pip  module. This is
        safer than typing  pip  directly
        because it uses the SAME Python
        that  python3  points to.
     python3 -m http.server
        Start a tiny HTTP server in the
        current folder.

Why not just  python3 venv .venv ? Because  venv  is not a script file in your folder; it is a module inside Python's installation. Without  -m , Python would look for a file called  venv  in the CWD and fail.


Script vs module  --  what is the difference?

Both are just  .py  files. The difference is HOW they are used, not how they are written.

     SCRIPT
        A  .py  file you run DIRECTLY to
        DO something.
        Example:  hello.py  that prints
        a greeting.
        You run it with a path:
           python3 hello.py
        Usually lives in YOUR project
        folder.

     MODULE
        A  .py  file (or a folder of
        them) meant to be IMPORTED by
        other code and provide reusable
        functions / classes / values.
        Example:  math , json , random
        (standard library), or your own
        helpers.py .
        You use it with  import :
           import helpers
        Usually lives on the Python
        module search path
        ( sys.path ), so any script can
        find it.

Same file, both roles:

The SAME  .py  file can be BOTH. It can be imported as a module AND run as a script. To make the "run as script" part safe (so imports don't trigger it), wrap that code in:

     if __name__ == "__main__":
         ...

(See section 14 for the details of  __name__ == "__main__" .)

How this connects to  -m :

     python3 hello.py
        Runs the FILE  hello.py  as a
        script (script style).

     python3 -m venv .venv
        Finds the MODULE  venv  on the
        module search path and runs it
        as a script (module style).
        No file path needed  --  just
        the module NAME.

So  -m  is Python's way of saying: "treat this MODULE like a script for this one run".


What happens:

  -  A new folder  .venv  is created in your current folder.
  -  Inside it, Python installs a private copy of the interpreter and the package machinery.

Verify:

     ls -la .venv/


4)  What is inside .venv/  (brief look)

     .venv/
     +-- bin/            Linux/macOS: python and pip
                         live here
     +-- lib/            installed packages go here
     +-- pyvenv.cfg      small config file

You do NOT edit any of these by hand. The tools take care of them.


5)  Activating the venv

On Linux:

     source .venv/bin/activate

What changes when active:

  -  Your prompt gets a  (.venv)  prefix, for example:

        (.venv) adarsh@laptop:~/myproj$

  -  python3  and  pip  now point at the ones inside  .venv/bin/  .
  -  Packages you install go into  .venv/lib/ , not the system.

Verify:

     which python3

Output (example):

     /home/adarsh/myproj/.venv/bin/python3

The path points INTO your project's  .venv , which confirms you are inside the venv.


6)  Working inside the venv

Once active, run Python and pip as usual. They now work only for this project.

     python3 hello.py
     pip install requests
     pip list

pip install requests  puts  requests  inside  .venv , not globally. Other projects are not affected.


7)  Deactivating

To leave the venv, run:

     deactivate

The  (.venv)  prefix disappears from your prompt, and  python3  /  pip  point back at the system versions.

Every NEW terminal starts DEACTIVATED and needs a fresh  source .venv/bin/activate .


8)  Deleting a venv

A venv is just a folder. To delete it:

     rm -rf .venv

Nothing is lost outside that folder. You can recreate it any time with  python3 -m venv .venv .


9)  Common gotchas

  (a)   Forgot to activate

        If you run  pip install requests  without activating the venv, the package goes to the SYSTEM Python. Always check the prompt for  (.venv)  before installing.


  (b)   Wrong Python inside venv

        A venv is tied to the Python that created it. If you built the venv with  python3.10  and later install  python3.12  , the venv keeps using 3.10. To upgrade, delete and recreate with the newer  python3 .


  (c)   Copying or moving the venv folder

        A venv contains ABSOLUTE PATHS inside its config. Moving the folder to a new location or new machine usually breaks it. Just recreate it in the new place.


  (d)   Activating on the wrong shell

        source .venv/bin/activate  is for bash and zsh. For fish and PowerShell, there are separate activate scripts inside the venv's  bin/  folder. Look for  activate.fish  or  Activate.ps1 .


In section 19 we look at  pip  and  requirements.txt  --  how to install packages and how to save the list of packages for a project.
