1  --  What Python is; check install

1)  What Python is

Python is a programming language  --  a set of rules for writing instructions a computer can run.

Facts you need for now:

  -  One of the most popular languages, used for web backends, data science, automation, and AI.
  -  Syntax is close to plain English, so it is beginner-friendly.
  -  Files with Python code have the extension  .py .


2)  Python 2 vs Python 3  --  use Python 3

Python has two major version families:

  -  Python 2  --  released in 2000, retired in 2020. Do NOT learn or use it.
  -  Python 3  --  current, in active development.

On most modern systems the command name  python2  does not exist anymore. Everything we write will run under Python 3.


3)  Check if Python is installed

Open a terminal and run:

     python3 --version

Expected output:

     Python 3.11.2

The number after "Python" will vary depending on how new your system is. Any  3.something  is fine for us.

Short form of the same command:

     python3 -V


If Python is installed, both commands print the version and return you to the prompt.

If Python is NOT installed, you will see:

     bash: python3: command not found

In that case, jump to section 5 below to install it.


4)  python  vs  python3  --  a common gotcha

Some systems also have a shorter command called  python . Behavior varies:

  -  On modern Ubuntu / Debian / Raspberry Pi OS,  python  often does not exist by default; only  python3  is installed. Typing  python  gives  "command not found" .
  -  On some setups  python  is an alias pointing to Python 3. Then  python  and  python3  behave the same.
  -  On very old systems,  python  used to mean Python 2. That is gone now, but you may still see old tutorials that assume it.

Rule for us:  always type  python3  explicitly. It works on every modern Linux without surprises.


5)  Installing Python if missing

Most modern Linux distributions ship Python 3 pre-installed. If yours does not, install it with the distro's package manager.

A "package manager" is the tool your Linux distro uses to install and update software. Which one you use depends on the distro:

  -  Ubuntu / Debian / Linux Mint
        sudo apt update
        sudo apt install python3

  -  Fedora
        sudo dnf install python3

  -  Arch Linux
        sudo pacman -S python

  -  openSUSE
        sudo zypper install python3


About  sudo :  it means "run this command as the admin user". Installing system software needs admin rights, so package-manager commands are prefixed with  sudo . Your terminal will ask for your password the first time. Type it (nothing shows on screen, that is normal), press Enter, and the install proceeds.


Verify after install:

     python3 --version
     Python 3.11.2

Once a version number prints, you are ready for section 2 (write your first Python program).
