asyncio basics: sync vs async, coroutines, async / await


1. THE PROBLEM ASYNC SOLVES

Most programs spend a lot of their time WAITING for something outside themselves — a network reply, a file to be read from disk, a database query, a timer to expire. In normal (synchronous) code, the whole program freezes during that wait. Nothing else happens. If you had 10 things to fetch from the internet and each takes 1 second, they run one after another and the whole thing takes 10 seconds.

Async code lets the program pause during those waits and USE that idle time to make progress on other work. If the 10 fetches can happen concurrently, the total time drops close to 1 second — the same as a single fetch, because they wait in parallel.

Important: async does NOT make individual operations faster. It just stops the program from sitting idle while one operation waits. If your work is CPU-bound (heavy math, image processing), async does not help.


2. SYNCHRONOUS CODE (THE BASELINE)

Regular Python code runs top-to-bottom, one statement at a time. When it hits something slow, it blocks.

    import time

    def fetch(name):
        print("start", name)
        time.sleep(1)               # blocks for 1 second — nothing else runs
        print("done", name)

    start = time.time()
    fetch("a")
    fetch("b")
    fetch("c")
    print("total:", round(time.time() - start, 2), "sec")

Output:

    start a
    done a
    start b
    done b
    start c
    done c
    total: 3.0 sec

Three calls, each 1-second wait, total 3 seconds. Even though the waits are independent, the program handled them one at a time.


3. ASYNCHRONOUS CODE (THE ALTERNATIVE)

Async rewrites the same idea so the waits can overlap.

    import asyncio
    import time

    async def fetch(name):
        print("start", name)
        await asyncio.sleep(1)      # pauses THIS coroutine, but the program keeps running
        print("done", name)

    async def main():
        start = time.time()
        await asyncio.gather(fetch("a"), fetch("b"), fetch("c"))
        print("total:", round(time.time() - start, 2), "sec")

    asyncio.run(main())

Output:

    start a
    start b
    start c
    done a
    done b
    done c
    total: 1.0 sec

Same three 1-second waits, but total 1 second — because while  fetch("a")  is asleep, the runtime uses that idle time to start  fetch("b")  and  fetch("c")  , and all three wake up together.

You will fully understand  asyncio.run(...)  and  asyncio.gather(...)  in the next section. For now, treat them as "the two lines needed to actually run async code" and focus on the two new keywords:  async def  and  await  .


4. THE async def KEYWORD

Adding  async  in front of  def  changes the function into a COROUTINE FUNCTION. It looks almost the same as a normal function, with two differences:

  - Inside its body you can use the  await  keyword.
  - Calling it does NOT run the code. It returns a coroutine object that must be awaited or handed to a runner.

    async def greet():
        print("hi")

    greet()          # DOES NOT PRINT ANYTHING — returns a coroutine object
    # RuntimeWarning: coroutine 'greet' was never awaited


5. THE await KEYWORD

Inside an  async def  function, you use  await  in front of another coroutine (or anything "awaitable") to run it and wait for its result.

    async def slow_double(x):
        await asyncio.sleep(0.1)
        return x * 2

    async def main():
        result = await slow_double(21)      # waits, then result is 42
        print(result)

Two rules:
  - You can ONLY use  await  inside an  async def  function. Using it in a normal function is a SyntaxError.
  - When your code awaits, the runtime is allowed to run OTHER coroutines during the wait. That is where the concurrency comes from.

Think of  await  as "pause me here, work on other things if you can, come back when this finishes".


6. WHAT A COROUTINE OBJECT IS

Calling an  async def  function does not execute its body. It creates and returns a special object called a COROUTINE.

    async def hello():
        return "hi"

    c = hello()
    print(c)         # <coroutine object hello at 0x...>

That object is "code that has not been run yet, ready to be run when someone awaits it or hands it to a runner". Two ways to actually run it:

  - From inside another  async def  function:  result = await hello()
  - From plain sync code (usually top-level):  result = asyncio.run(hello())

Never call an  async def  function and throw away the returned coroutine without running it. Python will warn you:  RuntimeWarning: coroutine '...' was never awaited  .


7. A FULL CONCRETE COMPARISON

Save as  compare_sync_async.py :

    import asyncio
    import time

    # --- sync version ---
    def sync_task(name):
        print("sync start", name)
        time.sleep(1)
        print("sync done", name)

    def run_sync():
        start = time.time()
        sync_task("a")
        sync_task("b")
        sync_task("c")
        print("sync total:", round(time.time() - start, 2), "sec\n")

    # --- async version ---
    async def async_task(name):
        print("async start", name)
        await asyncio.sleep(1)
        print("async done", name)

    async def run_async():
        start = time.time()
        await asyncio.gather(async_task("a"), async_task("b"), async_task("c"))
        print("async total:", round(time.time() - start, 2), "sec")

    run_sync()
    asyncio.run(run_async())

Run:

    python3 compare_sync_async.py

Output:

    sync start a
    sync done a
    sync start b
    sync done b
    sync start c
    sync done c
    sync total: 3.0 sec

    async start a
    async start b
    async start c
    async done a
    async done b
    async done c
    async total: 1.0 sec

Same total work, one third of the time — because the three waits happen concurrently in the async version.


8. WHEN TO USE ASYNC AND WHEN NOT TO

Use async when the program spends most of its time WAITING on I/O:
  - Many network requests
  - Many database queries
  - Reading many files at once (less common)
  - Handling many client connections in a server

Do NOT use async when the program is CPU-bound:
  - Heavy math, image processing, machine learning inference
  - Big JSON parsing loops on already-in-memory data

For CPU-bound work, async gives no speedup because there is no "waiting time" to overlap. In fact it can make things worse by adding overhead. Use threads or subprocesses for CPU-bound parallelism instead.


9. COMMON MISTAKES

  - Calling an  async def  function without awaiting it.  greet()  by itself does nothing except return a coroutine. Fix:  await greet()  inside another async function, or  asyncio.run(greet())  from sync code.

  - Using  await  in a plain  def  function. SyntaxError. Fix: change the outer function to  async def  .

  - Using blocking calls inside a coroutine. Writing  time.sleep(1)  inside an  async def  freezes the ENTIRE program — other coroutines cannot run while it sleeps. Always use the async equivalent, like  await asyncio.sleep(1)  .

  - Expecting async to speed up CPU-heavy code. It will not. Async only helps when you were previously WAITING on something outside the program.

  - Awaiting the same coroutine object twice. Each coroutine object can be awaited only once. To run the same work twice, call the function twice to get two separate coroutine objects.

  - Forgetting that  async def  changes the function's return type. If  f  is defined with  async def  , then  f()  returns a coroutine, not the actual result. You always need to  await  it (or hand it to a runner) to get the real value.
