asyncio event loop, asyncio.run, gather and tasks


1. WHAT THE EVENT LOOP IS

The EVENT LOOP is the engine that actually runs your coroutines. A coroutine object by itself is inert — it holds "code that could run". The event loop is what picks a coroutine, runs it until it hits an  await  , parks it while it waits, and switches to another coroutine that is ready to make progress.

Key facts about the event loop:
  - There is normally ONE event loop per program (per thread, to be precise).
  - It is SINGLE-THREADED. Only one coroutine runs at any given instant.
  - It is COOPERATIVE. A coroutine keeps the loop until it awaits something. If a coroutine never awaits, nothing else in the program can run.

The illusion of "many things happening at once" comes from the loop rapidly switching between coroutines whenever they hit an  await  and pause.


2. THE MENTAL MODEL

Picture a single worker at a desk with a stack of paused jobs. The worker picks a job, does the parts that do not need to wait, and the moment the job says "I need to wait for the postman" ( await ), the worker puts that job on a shelf and picks the next ready job. When the postman arrives with the reply for job #1, the loop marks job #1 as ready again and eventually resumes it.

  - Worker             = the event loop (single-threaded)
  - Jobs on the shelf  = paused coroutines waiting on I/O or a timer
  - Ready jobs         = coroutines whose await has completed
  - Rule of the desk   = the worker never does two jobs at the same instant, but never sits idle if any job is ready

If any job refuses to hand back the desk (long CPU work, or  time.sleep  instead of  await asyncio.sleep  ), the whole shop freezes.


3. asyncio.run  —  THE TOP-LEVEL ENTRY

From regular synchronous code you cannot use  await  . To get into async land, you call  asyncio.run(coro)  once at the top of your program.

    import asyncio

    async def main():
        print("in async land")

    asyncio.run(main())         # creates a new event loop, runs main() to completion, closes the loop

What  asyncio.run  does under the hood:
  - Creates a fresh event loop.
  - Runs the coroutine you gave it until it finishes.
  - Cleans up any leftover tasks.
  - Closes the loop.

Two rules:
  - Call it ONCE at the outermost level of your program. Do not call it inside another coroutine (there is already a loop running).
  - Give it a coroutine object, not a function. Write  asyncio.run(main())  , not  asyncio.run(main)  .


4. RUNNING MANY COROUTINES CONCURRENTLY WITH asyncio.gather

To run several coroutines concurrently and get their results back, use  asyncio.gather  .

    import asyncio

    async def double(x):
        await asyncio.sleep(0.1)
        return x * 2

    async def main():
        results = await asyncio.gather(double(1), double(2), double(3))
        print(results)          # [2, 4, 6]

    asyncio.run(main())

Points to remember:
  - You pass the coroutines as separate positional arguments (not as a list).
  - It returns a list of results in the SAME ORDER as the coroutines you passed.
  - All the coroutines run concurrently. The total time is roughly the time of the slowest one.
  - If any of them raises an exception,  gather  by default re-raises it and cancels the rest.


5. TASKS  —  asyncio.create_task

Sometimes you want to KICK OFF a coroutine and let it run in the background while you do other things. That is what  asyncio.create_task(coro)  is for. It schedules the coroutine on the loop immediately and returns a TASK object you can await later.

    import asyncio

    async def worker(name, seconds):
        await asyncio.sleep(seconds)
        print(name, "done")
        return name

    async def main():
        t1 = asyncio.create_task(worker("A", 0.3))   # starts running now
        t2 = asyncio.create_task(worker("B", 0.1))   # starts running now
        print("both scheduled")

        result_b = await t2                          # wait for B specifically
        result_a = await t1                          # wait for A specifically
        print("got", result_a, result_b)

    asyncio.run(main())

Output:

    both scheduled
    B done
    A done
    got A B

Difference between  gather  and  create_task  :
  - gather        -> "run these coroutines together and give me all their results at once"
  - create_task   -> "start this coroutine now, hand me a handle, I will wait for it later (or not)"

Both give concurrency; the choice is about how you want to await the results.


6. asyncio.get_running_loop

From inside an async function you can grab a reference to the currently running loop:

    async def main():
        loop = asyncio.get_running_loop()
        print(loop)

You need this whenever you want to call a lower-level loop method — for example, to schedule a callback, or (as you will see in the next section) to hook OS signals into the loop. In everyday application code you mostly do not need to touch the loop directly;  asyncio.run  ,  gather  , and  create_task  cover 90% of use cases.


7. A CONCRETE EXAMPLE PUTTING IT TOGETHER

Save as  loop_demo.py :

    import asyncio
    import time

    async def slow(name, seconds):
        print("start", name)
        await asyncio.sleep(seconds)
        print("done", name)
        return name.upper()

    async def main():
        start = time.time()

        # get a handle to the current event loop (usually not needed)
        loop = asyncio.get_running_loop()
        print("running on loop:", type(loop).__name__)

        # kick off two background tasks
        t1 = asyncio.create_task(slow("a", 0.5))
        t2 = asyncio.create_task(slow("b", 0.3))

        # meanwhile, gather three more coroutines
        results = await asyncio.gather(slow("c", 0.2), slow("d", 0.1), slow("e", 0.4))
        print("gather returned:", results)

        # now wait for the two background tasks we kicked off earlier
        print("background:", await t1, await t2)

        print("total:", round(time.time() - start, 2), "sec")

    asyncio.run(main())

Run:

    python3 loop_demo.py

Output (order of the "done" lines depends on the sleep durations):

    running on loop: _UnixSelectorEventLoop
    start a
    start b
    start c
    start d
    start e
    done d
    done c
    done b
    done e
    done a
    gather returned: ['C', 'D', 'E']
    background: A B
    total: 0.5 sec

All five coroutines ran concurrently. Total wall time is about the length of the slowest one (0.5 seconds), not the sum (1.5 seconds).


8. COMMON MISTAKES

  - Calling  asyncio.run  twice in the same program, or calling it from INSIDE another coroutine. Raises RuntimeError. Rule: exactly one  asyncio.run  at the top level.

  - Passing a function instead of a coroutine to  asyncio.run  . Wrong:  asyncio.run(main)  . Right:  asyncio.run(main())  .

  - Forgetting to  await  a task. If you write  asyncio.create_task(worker())  and never await it, the loop may finish before the task runs. You will see  Task was destroyed but it is pending!  warnings. Always keep a reference and await it (or let  gather  hold it).

  - Passing a list to  gather  the wrong way.  asyncio.gather([a, b, c])  will not run them concurrently. Use the star:  asyncio.gather(*[a, b, c])  , or pass them as separate arguments:  asyncio.gather(a, b, c)  .

  - Blocking the event loop with a slow synchronous call ( time.sleep  , a large computation, a blocking network library). Everything else stops until that call returns. Use the async version, or run the work in a thread with  asyncio.to_thread(...)  .

  - Trying to call  asyncio.get_running_loop()  from OUTSIDE a running loop (from plain sync code). Raises RuntimeError. It is only valid inside an  async def  function that is currently running.

  - Assuming coroutines run in the order you wrote them. Order of execution is decided by the event loop based on which coroutine is ready. Do not depend on the order that lines appear in your source.
