asyncio.Event and loop.add_signal_handler (graceful shutdown pattern)

1. WHAT asyncio.Event IS

An  asyncio.Event  is a SHARED FLAG with only two positions:

  - NOT SET (the starting position)
  - SET

Any coroutine that holds the same Event object can either WAIT on the flag or CHANGE the flag.

  - Waiting. A coroutine calls  await event.wait()  . If the flag is NOT SET, that coroutine pauses right there and does nothing more. Many coroutines can be paused on the same Event at the same time.
  - Changing. Any coroutine (or a signal handler, or plain sync code) calls  event.set()  to flip the flag to SET. The moment that happens, every coroutine that was paused on  event.wait()  wakes up together and continues from the line right after its  wait  call.
  - Resetting. The flag stays SET forever until someone calls  event.clear()  , which puts it back to NOT SET. After  clear()  , new  event.wait()  calls will pause again; ones that already woke up are unaffected.

The Event is only useful when the SAME object is shared. Two separate  asyncio.Event()  instances do not talk to each other — setting one has no effect on the other.

Common uses:
  - "Please stop / shut down" flag for a long-running server.
  - "Startup finished" flag other coroutines can wait on before doing their work.
  - Simple one-shot notification between coroutines.

2. THE FOUR METHODS

The Event API is small — one constructor and four methods:

  -   event = asyncio.Event()   --  create a new Event; it starts in NOT SET.
  -   await event.wait()   --  pauses the current coroutine until the flag becomes SET.
  -   event.set()   --  flips the flag to SET and wakes every waiter.
  -   event.clear()   --  flips the flag back to NOT SET.
  -   event.is_set()   --  returns True if SET, False otherwise. Does not wait.

Two rules worth remembering:
  - The flag is SHARED. Every coroutine that has a reference to the same Event object sees the same state.
  - Once SET, further  await event.wait()  calls return IMMEDIATELY without blocking. They only block again after  event.clear()  .

3. A SIMPLE EXAMPLE

    import asyncio

    async def worker(name, ready):
        print(name, "waiting for the signal")
        await ready.wait()
        print(name, "got it, doing work")

    async def main():
        ready = asyncio.Event()
        asyncio.create_task(worker("A", ready))
        asyncio.create_task(worker("B", ready))
        await asyncio.sleep(0.5)
        print("main: flipping the flag")
        ready.set()
        await asyncio.sleep(0.1)

    asyncio.run(main())

The two  create_task  calls kick off both workers, which immediately pause on  ready.wait()  . The first  asyncio.sleep(0.5)  simulates a startup delay. The  ready.set()  call wakes both parked workers at once. The final  asyncio.sleep(0.1)  gives the workers a moment to finish printing before  main  exits.

Output:

    A waiting for the signal
    B waiting for the signal
    main: flipping the flag
    A got it, doing work
    B got it, doing work

Both workers were parked on  await ready.wait()  . The single  ready.set()  call released both of them.

4. WHY THE ASYNC VERSION OF SIGNAL HANDLING EXISTS

You already know  signal.signal(sig, handler)  from the plain-signal notes. It registers a handler that Python runs when the OS (Operating System) delivers the signal. That handler can arrive AT ANY POINT in the program, including in the middle of an executing coroutine, which is unsafe in an async program:

  - The handler might touch data that a coroutine was midway through updating.
  - The handler cannot itself use  await  , because it runs outside the event loop.

The asyncio-friendly way to hook signals is:

    loop.add_signal_handler(sig, callback)

This tells the event loop: "when the OS delivers  sig  , schedule  callback  to run inside the loop at the next safe moment". The callback runs in the same single-threaded loop as your coroutines, so it can safely touch shared state, set  asyncio.Event  flags, cancel tasks, and so on.

Two rules for the callback:
  - It must be a PLAIN sync function (or a bound method), NOT an  async def  coroutine.
  - It takes NO arguments.

Availability: Unix and macOS only. Windows does not support  add_signal_handler  ; you fall back to  signal.signal  there.

5. THE GRACEFUL SHUTDOWN PATTERN

Putting Event and add_signal_handler together is the standard pattern for long-running async servers to shut down cleanly when the user hits Ctrl-C or a process manager sends SIGTERM.

The five steps:

  1. Create an  asyncio.Event  that will act as the "stop" flag.
  2. Grab the running loop.
  3. Register  event.set  as the handler for SIGINT and SIGTERM.
  4. Start your servers / workers.
  5. Do  await stop.wait()  in your main coroutine. When the signal arrives, the handler calls  event.set  , the wait returns, and you fall through to cleanup code.

Skeleton:

    async def main():
        stop = asyncio.Event()
        loop = asyncio.get_running_loop()
        for sig in (signal.SIGINT, signal.SIGTERM):
            loop.add_signal_handler(sig, stop.set)

        await start_servers()
        await stop.wait()
        await shutdown_servers()

Notice that  stop.set  is passed WITHOUT parentheses. You are passing the METHOD ITSELF as the callback, not calling it. The event loop will call it later when a signal arrives.

7. COMMON MISTAKES

  - Passing a coroutine function to  add_signal_handler  . Wrong:  loop.add_signal_handler(sig, my_async_cleanup)  when  my_async_cleanup  is an  async def  . The callback must be a PLAIN sync callable. If you need to run async cleanup, use the sync callback to  event.set  and do the real cleanup in the main coroutine after  event.wait()  returns.

  - Calling the callback instead of passing it:  loop.add_signal_handler(sig, stop.set())  . The  ()  runs the method immediately, once, and passes  None  as the handler. Correct form:  loop.add_signal_handler(sig, stop.set)  (no parentheses).

  - Using plain  signal.signal(...)  from inside an async program. It can work but is unsafe, because the handler runs outside the loop and may interrupt a coroutine mid-update. Prefer  loop.add_signal_handler  .

  - Trying  add_signal_handler  on Windows. NotImplementedError. On Windows, fall back to  signal.signal  , or check the OS at startup and pick the right path.

  - Forgetting that an Event stays SET forever until you call  clear()  . If you plan to reuse the same Event for a second cycle, clear it after the wait returns.

  - Creating the Event outside the coroutine and never sharing the same object with the workers. Every waiter must hold a reference to the SAME Event instance. Two separate Events do not talk to each other.

  - Awaiting  event.wait()  from plain sync code. It is a coroutine; use it inside an  async def  and drive it with  asyncio.run  or another running loop.
