14  --  Modules and import  (own module, standard library, third-party module)

1)  What a module is

A MODULE is a Python file ( .py ) whose contents (variables, functions, classes) can be used from OTHER Python files by IMPORTING it.

You have already been writing modules without knowing it. Every  .py  file is a module.

A LIBRARY (or "package") is a collection of related modules bundled together.

2)  import  --  the basic form

Syntax:

     import <module_name>

After this line, you can use the names inside that module with dot syntax:

     <module_name>.<name>

Code:

     import math

     print(math.pi)
     print(math.sqrt(16))

Output:
     3.141592653589793
     4.0

math  is a module in Python's STANDARD LIBRARY (built-in, no install needed).  pi  is a variable inside it;  sqrt  is a function inside it.

3)  from ... import ...   --  bring specific names into scope

When you only need one or two names from a module, import them directly and use them without the module prefix.

Code:

     from math import pi, sqrt

     print(pi)
     print(sqrt(25))

Output:
     3.141592653589793
     5.0

Now  pi  and  sqrt  are directly available, no  math.  prefix.

Avoid  from module import *  (star import). It brings in every name and can silently overwrite your own variables. Explicit is better.

4)  import ... as ...   --  give the module a shorter name (alias)

Handy for modules with long names.

Code:

     import datetime as dt

     print(dt.date.today())

Output:  (today's date)

Common conventions from the ecosystem:

     import numpy as np
     import pandas as pd
     import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

You can also alias a specific name:

     from math import sqrt as square_root

5)  Your own module

Any  .py  file in your CWD (or on the Python search path) can be imported.

Suppose you have a file  helpers.py  in the same folder as your main script:

     helpers.py
     ----------
     def greet(name):
         return f"hello, {name}"

     def square(x):
         return x * x

From another file in the same folder:

     main.py
     -------
     import helpers

     print(helpers.greet("adarsh"))
     print(helpers.square(4))

Run:

     python3 main.py

Output:
     hello, adarsh
     16

You can also use  from helpers import ... :

     from helpers import greet
     print(greet("adarsh"))

Note: the module NAME is the file name WITHOUT  .py . So  helpers.py  is imported as  import helpers  (not  import helpers.py ).

Because your own folder is searched first, a file named after a standard-library module HIDES the real one. Save a  math.py  next to your script and  import math  picks up your file, and every call into it fails in a way that makes no sense. Never name a file after a module you also import.

6)  Standard library  --  a taste

Python ships with a large STANDARD LIBRARY. Some commonly used modules:

     math         math functions and constants
     os           operating-system level things: paths, environment variables, folder listings
     sys          Python interpreter info, command-line arguments
     json         read and write JSON text
     datetime     dates and times
     random       random numbers, shuffling, random choice
     re           regular expressions
     pathlib      modern object-oriented path handling

Small examples:

json  --  turn a Python object into text and back. JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) is a plain-text data format that every major language can read and write.

Code:

     import json

     data = {"name": "adarsh", "age": 25}
     text = json.dumps(data)
     print(text)

     back = json.loads(text)
     print(back)

Output:
     {"name": "adarsh", "age": 25}
     {'name': 'adarsh', 'age': 25}

random  --  pick random values.

     random.choice(seq)      pick ONE random element from a sequence (list, tuple, string). Empty sequence  ->  IndexError .
     random.randint(a, b)    a random integer between  a  and  b , BOTH ENDS INCLUDED. Needs  a <= b , else  ValueError .
     random.randrange(a, b)  a random integer from  a  up to  b , with  b  EXCLUDED. Do not mix this up with  randint .

Code:

     import random

     print(random.choice(["a", "b", "c"]))
     print(random.randint(1, 6))

Output:  (varies each run)

datetime  --  work with dates and times.

Code:

     from datetime import date

     today = date.today()
     print(today)
     print(today.year)

Output:  (varies)

You do NOT need to install any of these  --  they come with Python.

7)  Third-party modules

Anything NOT in the standard library is called a THIRD-PARTY module. You install it with  pip . Common ones:

     requests    HTTP requests
     fastapi     web framework we will use in the FastAPI topic
     litellm     LLM (Large Language Model) library we will use in the AI agent topic later

Basic install command:

     pip install <name>

For example:

     pip install requests

After installing, use it like any other module:

     import requests

     r = requests.get("https://example.com")
     print(r.status_code)

8)  Where does Python look for modules?

When you write  import x , Python searches in this order:

     1.  Built-in modules.
     2.  The folder of the running script (your CWD in simple cases).
     3.  Directories listed in the environment variable  PYTHONPATH .
     4.  The installation-specific "site-packages" folder (where pip installs third-party modules).

You can inspect the full list at runtime. Before we run the code, a quick word on  sys  and  sys.path .

The  sys  module is part of the standard library. It lets your program talk to the Python INTERPRETER itself  --  things like the version, the command-line arguments, exiting the program, and the list of folders Python searches for modules.

A few useful names in  sys :

     sys.version     Python version string
     sys.platform    "linux" ,  "win32" ,  "darwin"  (mac)
     sys.argv        list of command-line arguments given to the script
     sys.exit()      stop the program now
     sys.path        list of folders where Python looks for modules to import

sys.path  is a plain Python LIST of folder paths (strings). When you write  import x , Python walks this list top to bottom and looks for  x.py  (or an  x/  package) in each folder. The FIRST match wins  --  the rest are ignored.

A typical  sys.path  looks like:

     /home/adarsh/myproject
     /usr/lib/python3.12
     /usr/lib/python3.12/lib-dynload
     /home/adarsh/.local/lib/python3.12/site-packages
     /usr/lib/python3/dist-packages

Because it is a plain list, you CAN modify it at runtime with  sys.path.append("/some/folder") . Avoid doing this in normal code  --  keep your imports predictable and rely on the standard search order.

Code:

     import sys
     for p in sys.path:
         print(p)

Output:  (list of directories)

When Python finishes that search without a match, you get:

     ModuleNotFoundError: No module named 'helpers'

Three things cause it: the name is mistyped, the file is not in the folder you are running from, or it is a third-party module you have not installed yet.

A second import failure has a different shape. A CIRCULAR IMPORT is two files that each import the other: neither can finish loading, so one of them is handed a half-built module and raises  ImportError  on a name that plainly exists. Restructure so the dependency runs one way only.

9)  Script vs module  --  what is the difference?

Both are just  .py  files. The difference is HOW they are used, not how they are written.

     SCRIPT    a  .py  file you run DIRECTLY to DO something. Example:  hello.py  that prints a greeting. You run it by path:  python3 hello.py . It lives in YOUR project folder.
     MODULE    a  .py  file (or a folder of them) meant to be IMPORTED by other code, providing reusable functions, classes and values. Example:  math ,  json ,  random , or your own  helpers.py . You use it with  import helpers . It lives on the module search path, so any script can find it.

Running a module as if it were a script  --  the  -m  flag

     python3 hello.py      runs the FILE  hello.py  as a script.
     python3 -m venv .venv  finds the MODULE  venv  on the search path and runs it. No file path needed, just the module NAME.

So  -m  means "treat this MODULE like a script for this one run". Creating a virtual environment is one everyday use of it.

Same file, both roles:

The SAME  .py  file can be BOTH  --  imported as a module AND run as a script. One line of code is what keeps the two uses apart.

10)  __name__ == "__main__"

At the bottom of many Python files you will see:

     if __name__ == "__main__":
         <code to run when the file is executed directly>

This block runs ONLY when you execute the file directly with  python3 file.py . If another file  import s it, the block does NOT run.

Useful when a module both EXPORTS functions AND can run as a script.
