32  --  asyncio basics: sync vs async, coroutines, async / await

1)  What concurrency is

CONCURRENCY means "several tasks are IN PROGRESS during overlapping time windows". Only one task is actually executing at any given instant, but multiple tasks are alive  --  started, paused, waiting, resumed  --  during the same overall stretch of wall-clock time.

The word to watch is OVERLAPPING. Concurrency is NOT "at the same instant" (that is parallelism). It is "start-to-finish spans intersect on a timeline".

Concrete comparison. Three network fetches, each waiting 1 second for a reply:

     Sequential (no concurrency):
       fetch A: XXXXXXXXXX
       fetch B:           XXXXXXXXXX
       fetch C:                     XXXXXXXXXX
       total: 3 seconds

     Concurrent (with concurrency):
       fetch A: XXXXXXXXXX
       fetch B: XXXXXXXXXX
       fetch C: XXXXXXXXXX
       total: ~1 second

In the concurrent version, all three fetches are in progress during the same one-second window. Only one task is actively executing at any instant, but the three WAITS happen during that same window.

Where concurrency helps: when tasks spend most of their time WAITING (network reply, disk read, database query, timer). The idle time of one task becomes the working time of another.

Where concurrency does NOT help: pure CPU (Central Processing Unit) work with no waits. Overlapping three heavy math computations on one CPU gives no speedup  --  there are no idle windows to fill.

CONCURRENCY vs PARALLELISM:

  -  Concurrency  --  one worker, multiple tasks in progress by interleaving during their waits. asyncio gives you this.
  -  Parallelism  --  multiple workers running truly at the same instant. Threads and multiprocessing give you this. asyncio does NOT.

2)  Threads, threading and spawning

These three words come up constantly next to asyncio, so get them straight first.

A THREAD is a single line of execution inside a program. Picture a single HAND writing on paper: at any moment, the hand is in one place doing one thing. Every program starts with one thread by default, called the "main thread"  --  that is the hand that runs your  print , your loops, your function calls.

THREADING means using MORE THAN ONE thread at the same time. Two hands writing on the same paper in parallel; two things happen at once.

Example scenario. A program has to (a) download a big file and (b) keep a spinner animation moving on screen. With ONE thread, the download BLOCKS the spinner  --  the spinner freezes till the download ends. With TWO threads, one downloads while the other keeps the spinner going.

SPAWNING a thread means creating a new thread and starting it up. "Spawn" is developer slang for "launch a new running unit". So "spawning threads" means asking the program to create extra worker threads alongside the main one.

Why not always use threads? Each new thread costs memory and some operating-system bookkeeping, and two threads touching the same data can step on each other, so they need LOCKS. That is overkill for many workloads.

Asyncio's route is different: ONE thread only. When a task hits an  await  and starts waiting, the thread puts that task aside and picks up another task that is ready to run. When the awaited thing finishes, the paused task resumes. One thread, many tasks, no threading needed. That is what the phrase "without spawning threads" points at.

3)  The problem async solves

Async is Python's built-in tool for writing concurrent code when the bottleneck is waiting on I/O (Input/Output)  --  network replies, database queries, file reads, timers. In synchronous code, the whole program freezes during those waits, so 10 sequential fetches of 1 second each take 10 seconds. With async, the same 10 fetches run concurrently and finish in about 1 second, because the wait for one fetch overlaps with the waits for the others.

Async does NOT make individual operations faster. It just prevents the program from sitting idle while one operation waits. This is why async has no benefit for CPU-bound work: there is no waiting time to overlap.

4)  Synchronous code  --  the baseline

Regular Python code runs top-to-bottom, one statement at a time. When it hits something slow, it blocks.

     import time

     def fetch(name):
         print("start", name)
         time.sleep(1)
         print("done", name)

     start = time.time()
     fetch("a")
     fetch("b")
     fetch("c")
     print("total:", round(time.time() - start, 2), "sec")

Output:

     start a
     done a
     start b
     done b
     start c
     done c
     total: 3.0 sec

Three calls, each a 1-second wait, total 3 seconds. Even though the waits are independent, the program handled them one at a time.

The timing line uses two things covered earlier:  time.time()  returns the current time as a float (seconds since 1 January 1970, the "Unix epoch"), so subtracting an earlier snapshot gives the elapsed seconds; and  round(value, 2)  trims that float to two decimals for readable output.

5)  The  async def  keyword and coroutine objects

Adding  async  in front of  def  changes the function into a COROUTINE FUNCTION. It looks almost the same as a normal function, with two differences:

  -  Inside its body you can use the  await  keyword.
  -  Calling it does NOT run the code. It returns a special object called a COROUTINE.

     async def hello():
         return "hi"

     c = hello()
     print(c)

Output:

     <coroutine object hello at 0x...>

That object is "code that has not been run yet, ready to be run when someone awaits it or hands it to a runner". Two ways to actually run it:

  -  From inside another  async def  function:   result = await hello()
  -  From plain sync code:   result = asyncio.run(hello())

Never call an  async def  function and throw away the returned coroutine without running it. Python will warn you:  RuntimeWarning: coroutine '...' was never awaited .

6)  The three helpers

Three plain functions inside the  asyncio  module. All three appear in the async example that follows.

6a)   asyncio.sleep(seconds)

Pauses the CURRENT coroutine for the given number of seconds, WITHOUT freezing the whole program. While it waits, the runtime is free to run other coroutines that are ready.

     async def demo():
         print("A")
         await asyncio.sleep(2)
         print("B")

Two seconds pass between  A  and  B , and during those two seconds any other coroutine on the same runtime keeps running.

Contrast with the plain version:

     time.sleep(2)              blocks the ENTIRE program. Even other coroutines cannot run.
     await asyncio.sleep(2)     pauses only this one coroutine. Others still run.

Note the  await   --   asyncio.sleep  returns a coroutine object, so it has to be awaited to take effect.

6b)   asyncio.gather(*coroutines)

Takes several coroutines, runs them CONCURRENTLY, and waits until all of them finish. Returns a list of their results in the same order they were passed in.

     async def slow_square(x):
         await asyncio.sleep(1)
         return x * x

     async def main():
         results = await asyncio.gather(
             slow_square(2),
             slow_square(3),
             slow_square(4),
         )
         print(results)

Output:

     [4, 9, 16]

How the result list is built.  gather  waits until EVERY coroutine has finished. Once they are all done, it takes each coroutine's RETURN VALUE and packs them into a list. The order of that list matches the order the coroutines were PASSED IN, not the order in which they finished.

  -   slow_square(2)  was passed first, returned  4    ->  results[0] = 4
  -   slow_square(3)  was passed second, returned  9   ->  results[1] = 9
  -   slow_square(4)  was passed third, returned  16   ->  results[2] = 16

Finish order does not matter. Even if the third coroutine finishes before the first,  gather  still lines them up by INPUT position:

     async def wait_and_return(name, delay):
         await asyncio.sleep(delay)
         return name

     async def main():
         results = await asyncio.gather(
             wait_and_return("a", 3),
             wait_and_return("b", 1),
             wait_and_return("c", 2),
         )
         print(results)

Output:

     ['a', 'b', 'c']

Timeline:

     t=0.0 sec    all three coroutines start, all three go to sleep
     t=1.0 sec    "b" wakes up, returns  "b"
     t=2.0 sec    "c" wakes up, returns  "c"
     t=3.0 sec    "a" wakes up, returns  "a"  --  gather now has all results, builds the list, returns

Total time for this  gather : about 3 seconds.  gather  waits for the SLOWEST coroutine. Running them sequentially instead would take 3 + 1 + 2 = 6 seconds.

Even though  "b"  finished first and  "a"  finished last, the list is still  ['a', 'b', 'c']   --  the order they were handed to  gather .

To unpack the list into separate variables, tuple-unpack it:

     a_result, b_result, c_result = await asyncio.gather(
         slow_square(2),
         slow_square(3),
         slow_square(4),
     )

That gives  a_result == 4 ,  b_result == 9 ,  c_result == 16 .

If a coroutine has no explicit  return , its return value is  None , and that  None  still takes its slot in the list. Three such coroutines give  [None, None, None] .

Without  gather  you would  await  them one by one and lose the concurrency  --  three 1-second waits, one after another, for a total of about 3 seconds:

     a = await slow_square(2)
     b = await slow_square(3)
     c = await slow_square(4)

With  gather , the waits overlap. That is the whole point.

6c)   asyncio.run(coroutine)

The bridge from PLAIN sync code into the async world. It does three things in order:

  (a)  Create a new EVENT LOOP (the runtime that schedules coroutines).
  (b)  Run the given coroutine on that loop until it finishes.
  (c)  Close the loop and return the coroutine's result.

     async def hello():
         return "hi"

     result = asyncio.run(hello())
     print(result)

Output:

     hi

Rules of thumb:

  -  Call  asyncio.run(...)  EXACTLY ONCE at the very top of an async program  --  the last line of the file, or inside  main() .
  -  Never call  asyncio.run(...)  from inside another  async def  function. From within async code you already have a loop; just use  await .

7)  Asynchronous code  --  the alternative

The same idea rewritten so the waits can overlap.

     import asyncio
     import time

     async def fetch(name):
         print("start", name)
         await asyncio.sleep(1)
         print("done", name)

     async def main():
         start = time.time()
         await asyncio.gather(fetch("a"), fetch("b"), fetch("c"))
         print("total:", round(time.time() - start, 2), "sec")

     asyncio.run(main())

Output:

     start a
     start b
     start c
     done a
     done b
     done c
     total: 1.0 sec

Same three 1-second waits, but total 1 second  --  because while  fetch("a")  is asleep, the runtime uses that idle time to start  fetch("b")  and  fetch("c") , and all three wake up together.

8)  The  await  keyword

Inside an  async def  function, you use  await  in front of another coroutine (or anything "awaitable") to run it and wait for its result.

     async def slow_double(x):
         await asyncio.sleep(0.1)
         return x * 2

     async def main():
         result = await slow_double(21)
         print(result)

Output:

     42

Two rules:

  -  You can ONLY use  await  inside an  async def  function. Using it in a normal function is a  SyntaxError .
  -  When your code awaits, the runtime is allowed to run OTHER coroutines during the wait. That is where the concurrency comes from.

9)  A full concrete comparison

Save as  programs/compare_sync_async.py :

     import asyncio
     import time

     def sync_task(name):
         print("sync start", name)
         time.sleep(1)
         print("sync done", name)

     def run_sync():
         start = time.time()
         sync_task("a")
         sync_task("b")
         sync_task("c")
         print("sync total:", round(time.time() - start, 2), "sec\n")

     async def async_task(name):
         print("async start", name)
         await asyncio.sleep(1)
         print("async done", name)

     async def run_async():
         start = time.time()
         await asyncio.gather(async_task("a"), async_task("b"), async_task("c"))
         print("async total:", round(time.time() - start, 2), "sec")

     run_sync()
     asyncio.run(run_async())

Run:

     python3 compare_sync_async.py

Output:

     sync start a
     sync done a
     sync start b
     sync done b
     sync start c
     sync done c
     sync total: 3.0 sec

     async start a
     async start b
     async start c
     async done a
     async done b
     async done c
     async total: 1.0 sec

Same total work, one third of the time  --  because the three waits happen concurrently in the async version.

10)  When to use async and when not to

Use async when the program spends most of its time WAITING on I/O:

  -  Many network requests
  -  Many database queries
  -  Reading many files at once
  -  Handling many client connections in a server

Do NOT use async when the program is CPU-bound:

  -  Heavy math, image processing, machine learning inference
  -  Big JSON parsing loops on already-in-memory data

For CPU-bound work, async gives no speedup because there is no waiting time to overlap. It can even make things worse by adding overhead. Use threads or subprocesses for CPU-bound parallelism instead.

11)  Common mistakes

  -  Calling an  async def  function without awaiting it.  greet()  by itself does nothing except return a coroutine. Fix:  await greet()  inside another async function, or  asyncio.run(greet())  from sync code.

  -  Using  await  in a plain  def  function. That is a  SyntaxError . Fix: change the outer function to  async def .

  -  Using blocking calls inside a coroutine. Writing  time.sleep(1)  inside an  async def  freezes the ENTIRE program  --  other coroutines cannot run while it sleeps. Always use the async equivalent,  await asyncio.sleep(1) .

  -  Expecting async to speed up CPU-heavy code. It will not. Async only helps when you were previously WAITING on something outside the program.

  -  Awaiting the same coroutine object twice. Each coroutine object can be awaited only once. To run the same work twice, call the function twice to get two separate coroutine objects.

  -  Forgetting that  async def  changes the function's return type. If  f  is defined with  async def , then  f()  returns a coroutine, not the actual result. You always need to  await  it (or hand it to a runner) to get the real value.
