33  --  asyncio event loop, tasks and get_running_loop

asyncio.run ,  asyncio.gather  and  asyncio.sleep  all sit on top of one engine. This section is about that engine  --  the EVENT LOOP  --  and two new tools:  asyncio.create_task  and  asyncio.get_running_loop .

1)  What the event loop is

The EVENT LOOP is the engine that actually runs your coroutines. A coroutine object by itself is inert  --  it holds "code that could run". The event loop is what picks a coroutine, runs it until it hits an  await , parks it while it waits, and switches to another coroutine that is ready to make progress.

Key facts about the event loop:

  -  There is ONE event loop per program (per thread, to be precise).
  -  It is SINGLE-THREADED. Only one coroutine runs at any given instant.
  -  It is COOPERATIVE. A coroutine keeps the loop until it awaits something. If a coroutine never awaits, nothing else in the program can run.

The illusion of "many things happening at once" comes from the loop rapidly switching between coroutines whenever they hit an  await  and pause.

2)  Tasks  --   asyncio.create_task

To KICK OFF a coroutine and let it run in the background while you do other things, use  asyncio.create_task(coro) . It schedules the coroutine on the loop immediately and returns a TASK object you can await later.

     import asyncio

     async def worker(name, seconds):
         await asyncio.sleep(seconds)
         print(name, "done")
         return name

     async def main():
         t1 = asyncio.create_task(worker("A", 0.3))
         t2 = asyncio.create_task(worker("B", 0.1))
         print("both scheduled")
         result_b = await t2
         result_a = await t1
         print("got", result_a, result_b)

     asyncio.run(main())

Output:

     both scheduled
     B done
     A done
     got A B

Both  create_task  calls SCHEDULE the workers on the loop and return immediately  --  they do not block. The print "both scheduled" runs while  worker("A")  and  worker("B")  are already sleeping in the background. Then  await t2  waits specifically for the B task, and  await t1  for the A task. The order of the  await  calls does not change concurrency  --  both workers are already running.

Difference between  gather  and  create_task :

     gather        ->  "run these coroutines together and give me all their results at once"
     create_task   ->  "start this coroutine now, hand me a handle, I will wait for it later (or not)"

Both give concurrency; the choice is about how you want to await the results.

3)  When a scheduled task actually starts running

This is the subtle part.  create_task(coro)  SCHEDULES the coroutine on the loop, but scheduling is not the same as executing. The coroutine's body runs only when the loop gets control, and the loop gets control only when the CURRENTLY RUNNING code hits an  await .

Two-step rule:

  (a)   create_task(coro)  puts  coro  on the loop's ready queue and returns a Task handle. The line after  create_task  keeps running in the SAME coroutine (here,  main ), and  coro  gets no CPU time yet.
  (b)  The moment the current coroutine hits an  await , it yields to the loop. The loop then picks up each scheduled coroutine one by one and runs it UNTIL that coroutine hits its OWN  await . Then the loop switches to the next ready one.

Consequence: what a scheduled coroutine prints before you see the loop come back depends on WHAT COMES BEFORE ITS FIRST  await  in its own body.

Example A  --  the  worker  above, whose first line IS an await:

     async def worker(name, seconds):
         await asyncio.sleep(seconds)
         print(name, "done")

Timeline of  main() :

  -   t1 = create_task(worker "A")   --  A goes on the ready queue. Nothing prints.
  -   t2 = create_task(worker "B")   --  B goes on the ready queue. Nothing prints.
  -   print("both scheduled")   --  a SYNC statement in main. main has not yielded yet, so it runs immediately and prints  both scheduled .
  -   result_b = await t2   --  NOW main yields. The loop runs A: A's first line is  await asyncio.sleep(0.3) , so A parks immediately without printing. The loop runs B: same thing, parks after  await asyncio.sleep(0.1) , no print.
  -  After 0.1 sec B wakes, prints  B done , returns  "B" .  await t2  in main returns.
  -   result_a = await t1   --  main yields again. After 0.3 sec A wakes, prints  A done , returns  "A" .
  -  main prints  got A B .

That is why  both scheduled  appears BEFORE  B done  and  A done , even though the tasks were scheduled first  --  their first line was an await, so they had nothing to print before parking.

Example B  --  a  slow  coroutine whose first line is a sync print:

     async def slow(name, seconds):
         print("start", name)
         await asyncio.sleep(seconds)
         print("done", name)

Timeline of  main()  in that example:

  -   t1 = create_task(slow "a")   --  a scheduled. Nothing prints yet.
  -   t2 = create_task(slow "b")   --  b scheduled. Nothing prints yet.
  -   await asyncio.gather(slow "c", slow "d", slow "e")   --  three more coroutines are created and scheduled, and main YIELDS here. The loop now runs each ready coroutine (a, b, c, d, e) up to its first  await . Each one runs  print("start X")  first  --  a sync line  --  then hits  await asyncio.sleep(...)  and parks.

That is why  start a ,  start b ,  start c ,  start d  and  start e  all appear BEFORE  gather returned , even though the gather line was where main first yielded. The prints happened because  slow 's body prints BEFORE its first await.

The difference between the two outputs is not about  create_task  behaving differently. It is about the FIRST LINE OF THE COROUTINE BODY.  worker  parks immediately (await first);  slow  prints one line first, then parks.

4)   asyncio.get_running_loop

From inside a running coroutine, this returns the event loop object that is currently running.

     import asyncio

     async def main():
         loop = asyncio.get_running_loop()
         print(type(loop).__name__)

     asyncio.run(main())

Output:

     _UnixSelectorEventLoop

 _UnixSelectorEventLoop  is the default asyncio event loop implementation on Linux and macOS. The exact class name differs by platform, which is why the example prints  type(loop).__name__  rather than a hard-coded string.

Why you would want the loop object: most everyday async code never needs it, because  await ,  gather  and  create_task  already talk to the loop for you. You reach for  get_running_loop()  when you need a loop-level facility that has no plain  await  form. The one you will meet next is  loop.add_signal_handler(...) , the asyncio-safe way to react to Ctrl-C.

Two rules:

  -  It only works INSIDE a running coroutine. Calling it from plain sync code raises  RuntimeError .
  -  It does not create a loop; it hands you the one already running. Creating the loop is  asyncio.run 's job.

5)  A concrete example putting it together

Save as  programs/loop_demo.py :

     import asyncio
     import time

     async def slow(name, seconds):
         print("start", name)
         await asyncio.sleep(seconds)
         print("done", name)
         return name.upper()

     async def main():
         start = time.time()
         loop = asyncio.get_running_loop()
         print("running on loop:", type(loop).__name__)
         t1 = asyncio.create_task(slow("a", 0.5))
         t2 = asyncio.create_task(slow("b", 0.3))
         results = await asyncio.gather(slow("c", 0.2), slow("d", 0.1), slow("e", 0.4))
         print("gather returned:", results)
         print("background:", await t1, await t2)
         print("total:", round(time.time() - start, 2), "sec")

     asyncio.run(main())

Run:

     python3 loop_demo.py

Output (the order of the "done" lines follows the sleep durations):

     running on loop: _UnixSelectorEventLoop
     start a
     start b
     start c
     start d
     start e
     done d
     done c
     done b
     done e
     done a
     gather returned: ['C', 'D', 'E']
     background: A B
     total: 0.5 sec

All five coroutines ran concurrently. Total wall time is about the length of the slowest one (0.5 seconds), not the sum (1.5 seconds).

6)  Common mistakes

  -  Calling  asyncio.run  twice in the same program, or calling it from INSIDE another coroutine. Raises  RuntimeError . Rule: exactly one  asyncio.run  at the top level.

  -  Passing a function instead of a coroutine to  asyncio.run . Wrong:  asyncio.run(main) . Right:  asyncio.run(main()) .

  -  Forgetting to  await  a task. If you write  asyncio.create_task(worker())  and never await it, the loop may finish before the task runs. You will see  Task was destroyed but it is pending!  warnings. Always keep a reference and await it, or let  gather  hold it.

  -  Passing a list to  gather  the wrong way.  asyncio.gather([a, b, c])  will not run them concurrently. Use the star:  asyncio.gather(*[a, b, c]) , or pass them as separate arguments:  asyncio.gather(a, b, c) .

  -  Blocking the event loop with a slow synchronous call ( time.sleep , a large computation, a blocking network library). Everything else stops until that call returns. Use the async version, or run the work in a thread with  asyncio.to_thread(...) .

  -  Calling  asyncio.get_running_loop()  from OUTSIDE a running loop (from plain sync code). Raises  RuntimeError . It is only valid inside an  async def  function that is currently running.

  -  Assuming coroutines run in the order you wrote them. Order of execution is decided by the event loop based on which coroutine is ready. Do not depend on the order that lines appear in your source.
